Inside Microsoft's Windows Product Activation
---------------------------------------------

Berlin, Germany, July 9, 2001. Fully Licensed GmbH has analyzed the
internals of Windows Product Activation, Microsoft's anti-piracy
technology built into Windows XP. "We contribute technical facts to a
discussion that is currently characterized by uncertainty and
speculation about XP revealing details of a user's hardware
configuration, the installed software, or even personal data during
the activation procedure." says Thomas Lopatic, managing director and
CTO of Fully Licensed. The comprehensive technical analysis performed
by the licensing experts proves that in addition to insensitive
hardware-related information only the individual serial number of each
copy of Windows XP is transmitted.

Windows Product Activation is designed to enforce the licensing terms
that govern the use of Windows XP by binding an XP license to a single
hardware configuration and thus to a single computer. While the
activation procedure requires data to be transmitted to an activation
center, Microsoft declines to publish any technical details of the
information revealed by this data transmission. The lack of facts has
given rise to speculation. Some users fear that modifying their
hardware configuration would require re-activation of Windows
XP. Others fear that details of their hardware configuration could be
embedded in the transmitted data.

To satisfy the need for technical details, Fully Licensed GmbH has
performed an in-depth analysis of Windows Product Activation as
implemented by Windows XP Release Candidate 1. The experts discovered
that ten different hardware components form the basis for a hardware
ID, which is sent to the activation central during
activation. However, due to the method employed to generate the
hardware ID, it is very likely that many hardware configurations
result in the same ID. Consequently, determining the actual hardware
configuration corresponding to a given hardware ID is an infeasible
task. In addition to the hardware ID only information derived from the
product key - a kind of serial number accompanying each distributed
copy of Windows XP - is transmitted.

Moreover, typical hardware updates do not pose any problems
either. "More than three of the ten hardware components considered
when calculating the hardware ID have to be replaced - e.g. the
harddrive, the CD-ROM drive, the microprocessor, and the network
adapter - to make re-activation necessary. If the hardware ID is
associated with a notebook that supports a docking-station, the policy
is still more liberal." says Thomas Lopatic.

"Since our analysis proves that the transmitted information is
completely innocuous, we are surprised that Microsoft has been that
vague about the inner workings of WPA for all these months." says
Matthias Kunze, managing director and CFO of Fully Licensed. "Software
piracy is still a major problem for all software companies. And we
think that their interest in raising the bar for software pirates is
absolutely justified." he adds.

In addition to relying on technical methods to tackle software piracy
Fully Licensed advocate complementary means to form a holistic
approach to the problem. Advanced licensing models - e.g. software
rental or software leasing - offer a commercially attractive
alternative to the use of pirated software in companies. The necessary
technological basis has already moved from hype to here. "Software
watermarking, automated code obfuscation, online license enforcement,
and license management form parts of the Fully Licensed holistic
solution for software licensing and software distribution." says
Thomas Lopatic.

The technical paper covering the in-depth analysis of Windows Product
Activation as well as a demonstration program including source code is
available from the Fully Licensed website at
http://www.licenturion.com/xp/.

About Fully Licensed GmbH
-------------------------

Fully Licensed GmbH provides a secure and flexible infrastructure for
online licensing and online distribution of software. It integrates
software watermarking, automated code obfuscation, license enforcement
and license management, while preserving the end-user's right to
privacy. In addition to raising the bar for software pirates by
technical means, this approach supplies the basis for easy and secure
realization of advanced licensing models such as software rental or
software leasing. Fully Licensed GmbH consider themselves to be an
independent and unbiased mediator between software vendors and
end-users. Their research and development branch every now and then
analyzes licensing solutions implemented by other companies.

Contact
-------

Matthias Kunze <mkunze@licenturion.com>

Fully Licensed GmbH
Rudower Chaussee 29
12489 Berlin

Web http://www.licenturion.com
Tel +49 30 6392-6712
Fax +49 30 6392-6010
